hello friends welcome back to my channel
avarthita learning platform and in this
series of socket programming today i am
going to create a new video for you
where you can see how to create a
multi-client server multi-client means
let me just make some comments here i
will just share this code as well with
you
multi-client means a server
which can handle
more than one client
connections
at a time
simultaneously
okay so in the previous video that i
uh uploaded and that you might have seen
that was only for a for handling a
single client but this will be handling
a number of client at the same time
right so but again
here i have made it only to handle for
five clients at a time you can make it
to handle 20 or 30 or whatever you want
to do but for the demonstration purpose
i have made it only five and with the
description i will follow for this
program that i have written i will tell
you the important things that you need
to take care of when you are writing a
server for your program for your project
right so let's start with the
beginning like how to start writing the
code i have already written the code
here because the code is so lengthy that
if i
start writing and explaining at the same
time then it might take around one and
half or two hours and it will be a very
long session and so i decided that i
will share the code with you guys for
both the uh multi-client server as well
as the client for the demonstration the
client for testing right this will be
the server code also i have written the
code for the client this is the code for
the client so with the help of the
client we will see that how we are able
to connect to the server how
more than one clients are able to
connect to the server and how they will
be
having the different connections here
and how our server will be
handling all all of those clients one by
one okay so first of all um when you are
writing a program i have started it from
the main functions so here you can see
like i have taken one variable and end
rate for uh you know for checking the
return values of the apis and uh before
we call any of the functions related to
the socket apis socket system calls
first of all i have called this function
wsa startup i have already explained
this function in many of my videos but
again
let me tell you again this thing like
this is all about to start a windows
socket environment you just need to use
this
latest version of the wsa and then once
you call this wsa startup function if
this wsa startup is successful then in
that case you will be
you will be able to call all the other
functions but if you are not able to
call this function successfully
or you can say like it returns
um you know minus uh
it returns minus one uh just like here i
have just taken it here if it returns
minus one less than zero then
apart from displaying the message you
can do one more thing you can just call
like return
exit
failure
okay so exit failure is nothing but a
standard micro
okay i i don't want to explain this one
this is a standard micro which return
whose value is minus one right sorry
it's one right and when you return from
a main function then where does your
main function returns it returns to the
operating system so we need to tell the
operating system that our application
was closed uh because of some error but
when you uh use the exit success then in
that case it means that your server was
you know your program was successfully
returned no issue was there without any
failure all of the things were
successful and then your program
returned so this exits failure and exit
success you can check
by yourself uh so let's move uh to the
first system call which is the socket
call and i have already explained in
many of the videos but again the first
argument is afinit which means what
is the protocol family this is basically
the protocol family if you want to read
about the protocol family you can
search it on the google and you can get
a vast description around this uh like
if what is iafinet what is the other
address families that you can use apart
from that the second argument is what
kind of socket you want to use so we
want to use the stream socket i i hope
you know about the stream socket stream
socket means uh when you use the stream
socket then every time the connection
should be
uh
open i mean a connection should be
established all the time till the till
your communication is going on and in
case of udp like sock
drum that is the datagram socket for
that we use the dram so in case of udp
you don't want any open connection
active connection between your client
and your server
when you are using the udp but in case
of the stream socket or you can say
a connection oriented socket which is
represented by this macro which is soft
stream in that case you need to be
connected with the server all the time
till your communication is going on with
the client
right and the last argument is what
protocol you want to use we want to use
the tcp protocol transmission control
protocol for our communication between
the client and server
right so this is uh this number of
function number of arguments that we use
and if this function fails which means
if the return value is smaller than zero
then we will simply make a statement
that socket cannot be initialized and we
failed
exit failure that will come
and
after that what we need to do this is
the socket which is the listener socket
we call it the listener socket why we
call it a listener socket because we
will
use this socket
for listening to the new connection
right
don't worry i will explain one by one
everything this is the listener socket
but which you are creating as a at the
server why it is a listener socket
because using this socket identifier you
can see you can say this file descriptor
because any socket uh that you have got
it from the socket call socket system
call that is always a file descriptor or
you can say the socket descriptor right
so whenever you get a file descriptor
through the socket call that is used at
the server end for
listening to the active connections that
is the purpose of this
socket
the listener socket
so now before we start listening to the
uh to a particular port we need to
define a port so i have defined this
port on the top if you see here this is
the port
4 x 9 1 so 99 991 is the port number i
have written it here
and
i have just used this h2ns i have
already told why we use it because of
the network byte order right i have
explained about the network by white
order if you if you want to uh see the
details you can visit my
playlist of socket programming and you
will find the description in even in the
previous video that i have uploaded so
h2n is what it does because every
information when you are connecting over
the socket all the information goes uh
in network byte order network byte order
is the big endian
format big endian means
most significant byte first
right so that is why you have to convert
let me just
write it here most significant byte
first msb first
right because in this order only the
information is sent over the network so
that is why we have to set the port
using this h2ns only because s2ns
converts any number from least
significant byte order to the most
significant byte order by default our
port number that we store the
information that is in the least
significant byte order all these things
like least significant byte order and
the most significant byte order i have
explained already in the earlier videos
of my playlist for the socket
programming so i would suggest that go
through all the videos go through all
the videos that i have made on socket
programming on this playlist
on my channel and this video is
specifically i'm i'm making because
there were few
few requests like there should be one
complete thorough video where uh
everyone can find a single
place where they can find all the code
related to this server multi-client
server and as well as the client so that
is why i'm making this video otherwise
uh all the things i have already
explained right so i hope this video
will be helpful to you so
uh this this thing i think you you got
it s2ns why we use it because we need to
convert any information to the network
byte order which is the most significant
byte first order so that this
information can be
used for the networking for network
connections because all the networking
things takes place over the msb first
most significant byte order first and
then
we need to provide
the address the local address
where uh ip address basically where we
want to listen for the coming
connections for the coming clients for
the incoming clients so this is the uh
in editor is basically a macro
and mind it only for the server when you
are writing the code for the server then
only
use this macro only for server not for
the client it can be only useful when
you are going to call the bind function
it is not useful
when you are going to call the connect
function that is from the client when
you are using the client code when you
are writing the client code please
please please don't use this
right it is only useful for the bind
system call in the bind system call only
this can be replaced with the
uh you know it calculates the local ip
address and assigns it to the s
underscore editor right so this code is
assigning the ip address of the local
machine or you can say the local server
on which
which will be explored which will be
exposed to the uh
to the
outside world uh to uh to which address
any of the client need to be connect
client need to connect on this port
number right so this this is the
important point that you need to take
care of and the other one is the meme
set
which i have already told you in the
previous videos as well like this since
zero this need to be clear with the zero
and the size is eight the sin zero side
is basically eight right even if you
don't want to provide eight the correct
method is size of srv dots in 0 right
but we know the size so that is why i
have provided it but minded this is not
a good practice always use macros or
always use the right way to
make your code more readable right so
just for the demonstration i have just
used these constraints but mind it this
is not a good practice at all to use the
constants in your program either use
them
by declaring them as the macro
or you can just simply use the methods
that that are uh you know that are you
that need to be called here to make it
more relevant or more readable right so
here i just if i use size of srv.c0 then
everyone reading this program will be
aware that yes this is the
size of this particular member right and
after that you need to bind it and the
bind system call what you need to do you
first need to provide the listener
socket then you need to provide the srv
and this srv i have already declared on
the top if you will see
i have declared it here srv but mind it
i have declared it as sock editor in
right but here what i have done here
right i have you know type casted it
in the socket asterisk because both can
be type costed
right both are compatible this can be
converted to that
right or you can say the sock editor in
can be converted to socket asterisk type
casted type casting is possible for them
so that is why i have typecasted
and then the last argument is what is
the size of the structure that you want
to use so this is the structure that i
am using so this is asking for the size
of that structure so that we have
provided and so now we have bound at
this port using this bind call if this
fails then i'm simply returning it from
here exit exit failure and i've already
told you about these things exit failure
okay if this passes then i'm going to
start listening on the listener socket
so here i bound successfully on the port
and here i'm going to listen
so if i'm going to listen here
then i have set the limit of five
clients which means that at a time
simultaneously i am going to listen for
five clients at a time
right
so uh mind it if you are writing your
own application for your project this is
not a right practice you must need to
provide uh you know a number of clients
so provide the number of clients
you can listen uh based on the
architecture of your program based on
the based on what your architect had
suggested for your design right so here
i am not going to discuss about the
designs that that are done around the
socket programming here i'm just going
to tell you what you have to do to
create a multi-client server right
so here i have just mentioned it five so
that only five i can listen
only five sockets of only five new
connections from the client i can listen
and here i need to provide the n socket
which is the listener socket so i'm
listening on the listener socket
okay
if it fails then simply exit failure
and after that
you need to
now there will be a difference
in the previous video when we were
discussing about the
single client server connection there
was only one server there was one client
that we discussed in the previous video
that was a different story but here we
are going to listen to a number of
clients so now from here onwards please
listen carefully so here i have used a
structure time interval time val why i
have used it here i have provided this
number of seconds as one and here i
provided the number of microseconds this
u seconds means number of microseconds
so here i have provided the micro
seconds as zero just keep it noted i
will let you know why i have used it and
where i have used it
after that the most important thing is
the max ft
this max fd i have already declared on
top if you go to the top you will see
that i have declared it here as 0 as a
global variable right i have taken these
variables as global valuables just for
the demonstration purpose but again if
you are writing a good code if you are
writing a code for your project and if
you are writing in a c plus code please
please please choose your variables
wisely choose your variables private
protected whatever
based on a good programming practice
that you should follow just like these
things they can they should not be never
exposed
these variables these all these all
these things should be encapsulated
inside a clause but here just for the
demonstration purpose i have written it
in the simple c language right i have
not used any c plus plus kind of code
it's a c style code that i have written
here just to make the clear uh just to
make the concepts clear around the
socket programming right so let's let's
come back so let's understand this max
ft what this max fd means
when we are going to just listen
carefully okay when we are going to
uh you know listen to the number of
clients
so
there are two things one thing is
one is listener
one is listener socket
which is listening
right
the there could be apart from that there
could be
new clients
right there could be new clients
which could
send you message which could send you
message after connection
okay after making an active connection
with your server they
might be you know uh wanting they might
want to send you some messages after
connection right so listener socket will
listen to the new clients and
this new client or whatever new client
is coming and this listener socket
listen carefully all these things
we store we set in the fr there is an fd
set
fr
right fd set is a data structure that i
have declared on the top
this is fd set fr why i will use this fr
this fr is the variable name that i have
given you can give any name to this f
read anything so what i have done i have
just given this name and this is the fd
set and this fb set if you will if you
will see this uh you know go to the
definition then this fd set is basically
a array of bytes
right it is an area of bytes if you go
deep into this this is an area of bytes
so
anything
just come back
like listener socket or any new client
socket all these sockets
are basically some file descriptors they
are simply the integers right so all the
integers values that you are getting
through the new clients either through
the socket this socket call all these
are the integer values and all these
integer values are set into this bit set
right this is a set of bits and here you
set it
right in fr right that we will do
in the coming while loop
right so all you set in this fr why you
do this because you have to read on this
socket on this set this is a set where
which which we have created to let the
uh let the program know through the
select system call which i will explain
later
right so through the select system call
all this fd set where we can read any
information you can understand that
whether it's listener or whether the new
clients that you have created that you
have connected all those are
what kind of uh what kind of activity
you are going to perform on them you are
going to read on them
reading listener for new connections
from the new clients and reading the
clients that you have already connected
for the new messages that they could
send so all over all you are performing
a reading activity so for that reading
activity we will set all the read
all these sockets listener and new
clients in this fr which is an fd set i
hope you got the point and this is very
very important point and
why i have used this n max fd max fd has
been used
because i already explained you this is
a set of bits
so so
so that every bit is covered every bit
is set by this select call this select
call does is specific this is select
call is very important this select call
sets uh checks every
every bit of this bit a bit set which is
an fd set right that i have created
right so this fd set is read by this
select system call
for every bit
and
to ensure that every bit is
you know is read by the select system
call we provide this nmaxfd as one
greater than the maximum fd available so
as of now the maximum file descriptor fd
means file descriptor maximum file
descriptor value that is available is
through this socket system call you can
understand right this is the only system
called through which i have got a new fd
a new file descriptor so obviously this
is the maximum socket uh value right so
this maximum file descriptor value will
be set into this fr but to ensure that
everything is covered i give it plus one
right so if i give it plus one then we
are ensure that then we are sure that
every time it will be able to cover
every single bit inside this fd set that
is the whole purpose and even if you
don't provide this plus one then also
your select system call will mostly work
fine but
but at some point of time this may fail
you cannot guarantee that every fd has
been
read by this
select system call that we are going to
discuss just right now right so that is
why please keep in mind that to ensure
that every bit inside this fd set we are
going to put all the listeners and all
the new clients that connected that are
connected they should be
properly read by this select system call
that is why we have provided this n
socket plus one
okay now let's move ahead and keep this
in mind right now keep this noted as of
now i will come back again to this max
ft
okay now
now what we have done i was talking
about the fr this fd set so what i have
done inside this while loop i have i'm
running a while loop now so that i can
keep listening for the new connections i
can keep listening for the new messages
that a client could have sent so all
these things
[Music]
sorry so all these so to check all these
things i have called this select system
call here and i have provided this max
fd here so this takes uh max fd and
apart from that it takes the fr right so
i have done this like for first of all i
have make all the fd set bits 0 through
the fd 0 i have reset all the bits and
after that i have called fd set
i have made 0 first and then i have
called fd set
to make the socket
available to this fr
right so this is the listener socket i
am assigning this to the fd set fr
right
which is the reader socket list
all the things are read whether you are
listening for a new connection or you
are waiting for some message to come on
an existing client connection all these
activities are basically the reading
activities and that is why i have used
here
i have provided this thing and socket
into this i have set this
set the bit of the value which is in the
listener socket to fr which is the
readings read socket
okay and after that what i have done
here you can see a loop
why this loop has been used i have
declared this n client socket here
this is the inclined socket this is the
array of client sockets whenever a new
socket whenever a new client will come
i'm just
assigning those storing those new
clients in this area right again this is
not the standard practice and this is
not you should write your code just for
the demonstration purpose i have hard
coded the number of clients that i'm
handling right i hope you are getting
the point so what i have done i have
already told you that any client socket
in the beginning this client socket will
be empty everything will be zero right
you can see that wherever i have
declared it you can see that i have
initialized it with zero which means
that initially in the client socket
there will be nothing
there will be no active connection right
so what is happening here
when you come here
i'm just ensuring that all the socket
descriptors inside this client socket
array they are also set into this
reading socket list readers list fr
right so n client socket and index this
is the value and
here it is
set
as a bit
right for any client socket which is
available initially for the first call
when you will enter first time in this
loop please mind that this this will
never execute this if condition will
never be true because initially you
don't have any client right so this will
never be true but when you have at least
one client then every time you need to
make first all the reading descriptors
zero in the read set then you need to
put all these socket descriptors for the
new connections for the listener socket
and for the client socket in this ft set
right and you need to
make this fd set again for everything
that is available to you as a socket
descriptor why we need to do this please
mind it right please remember it why we
need to do this again and again right
you can see that you might think like i
can do it only for the first time i can
do it outside this while loop no you
cannot do this outside while loop
because
every time you call this select call
this select call is very important every
time you call this make make the call to
select system call what happens that
after it returns you you can see that i
have provided fr
here address ffr which is the read
reader descriptors right where you are
reading right the socket connections
where you are reading
where you are waiting for something to
come right either a new connection or
some new message from the existing
client the second and third argument are
the third and fourth argument i have
made them zero basically this third
argument says you can provide the writer
descriptor here you can provide those
descriptors which are throwing the
exception but i don't have to care about
those like where i'm going to write and
where i'm going and getting any
exception so that is why i have provided
them as null
and then i have provided the time
interval you might have seen that i have
used this struck time well so i have
provided the time interval here
right and the select call and this is
the one second time interval so what
does this mean that the select system
call
check all these number of for all these
number of
for all this maximum number of value
here max fd for all this maximum number
of value inside this fr which is the
file read of file descriptors of readers
where you want to see if anything
is there to read on the socket
on the on the port right and this is the
time interval which is the one second
which means before the select system
call returns it will it will it will uh
simply wait for one second
right before it returns after one second
when it will return if there is any new
connection or if you have a new client
already
right if you have a new client already
and that client has sent some message
then this fr will be set and here and
red will return one which means one
socket is a one
file descriptor is there which is ready
for read right so this is the purpose
and the other thing is that every bit in
this fr please mind it every bit this in
this fr that you have set here is reset
after this select call let me just make
a statement here so that with the code
this will be available to you
after above call
every bit is
reset by
select call
in
fr right in
file leaders
readers descriptor
okay so
so
this is the select call which is used to
have this checked whether any of these
sockets that we have already here in
this fr they are ready to read anything
or not right on the port okay so there
could be three results
right first result is n rate is smaller
than zero which means that select system
call didn't work properly in that case
what we will do will simply return the
second case could be that end rate
returns 0
when it returns 0
it returns 0 when
there is nothing on the port to read
which means that simply we are we have
polled the
port and there was nothing there and so
we will simply make a message here that
no client at port waiting for an active
connection
right or any new message right this is
the you know half message active
connection
new
message
this is the complete message so there is
nothing new to read or there is nothing
new to connect
with a new client right else the third
case is the else case where n rate is
greater than zero
right
there are two cases now the third case
is obviously n rate is greater than zero
so if n red is greater than zero which
means there is something waiting on this
on the port in that case what happens
that if fdh set through this ffd set
what we do through this fdh set we check
whether our listener socket is ready or
not
right what happens that every bit is
checked by this select function
but
if
there could be two
possibilities one possibility is that
your listener socket is
getting a new connection request for a
new client in that case you will see
that fdh socket is true for your
listener socket this will become true fd
h set is used for that purpose only and
if that is the case then you will go to
this handle new connection which means
that you are going to handle you are
going to accept a new connection now let
us see what is happening inside it
so here you can see like handle new
connection we are calling this new
function accept
right what i'm doing
please mind it when you are listening on
a socket
on a socket on the server then that
listener socket is always listening on a
particular port always for the for that
purpose only that is used but when a new
connection comes and you call this
accept
then in that accept call you provide the
first argument as the listener socket
please listen carefully and the second
argument and the third i have provided
null
right the second argument and third
argument if you want to use you can use
what happens when you use them basically
second argument contains the
information something like this stock
addressing for what for the client
connection
from where this request for connection
has come so if you want to store the
information related to the client that
has requested to connect to you that you
can use here that you can if you want to
use that you can use it here and you can
simply accept the connection and after
accepting the connection the new client
will be returned here
that new client will be a new file
descriptor please mind it
and
new client
will be
a new file descriptor
and
now
the client
communication
will take place
using this connection only
this socket only this file descriptor or
socket
okay so this will be the new client
make like new client socket descriptor
you can say the file descriptor using
which
uh the for ongoing connection ongoing
communication then
the communication going forward
for this client will take place
using this socket which means
this socket which was used earlier
listener socket this listener socket is
only
providing you the help to get a new new
client socket
so that you can communicate using that
new client socket so that new client
socket has been provided here after the
accept system call so with that accept
system call you now have have a new
client socket now what you have to do if
this new client socket is smaller than
zero then obviously
you can say like not able to get a new
client socket and you can return from
this function okay but if you have got a
new client socket using the accept
function then what what i have done i
have simply done like in this client
socket array
you know that this is the client socket
array inside this client socket array i
have checked for a position which is
available right and the available
position is something where the client
index is zero
the value at a particular index in that
array is zero so wherever i found that
there is a zero value which means there
is no
uh socket
uh client socket
assigned
so in that case what i will do if there
is no client socket assigned i will
simply assign the new socket which is
the new client socket to this
array at a particular index
right
and now i have this new client using
which i can
listen
for the new messages from the
client which is now connected with me
using the accept i have connected now
right using the accept call i have
connected now i have accepted the new
connection and i have stored this in the
new client socket right and one more
thing i already told you that this
select system call this select system
call always checks for the max fd so it
may be please listen carefully it may be
that the new client socket that you have
found
right it it may have a value greater
than the listener socket
right
so if this
value is greater than the max fd which
was earlier the listener socket then in
that case you need to reset this max fd
value
right otherwise no
why i have already explained that why
you need to have this value greater than
1 from the
existing uh client socket
right so max fd you need to provide this
n new client plus one
right so this will be the max fd if this
is greater than max fd then max fd
should be replaced
and why because the number of bits that
you need to check through the select
system call they should be
you know
they should make some sense they should
be
in such a way provided so that select
system call knows that how many bits i
need to check before i can ensure that i
have checked all the socket descriptors
or you can say all the file descriptors
okay so this is all about this
new connection handling and after that
what i have done if index is equal to 5
which means if more than 5 connections
have came and i have already connected
to 5 clients then i will
send the message to the
you know
new client that server is busy i cannot
accept your connection
okay so this can be done this can be
sent to the client
right so here
please mind it that i have used it only
for the demonstration purpose this is
not the way you will code in your real
project
please mind it don't do this mistake
otherwise your manager will be very
unhappy with you your reviewer your
architect
will not be happy with you okay so
we have understood this function now
why we used it handle new connections
and now we are going to understand this
function handle data from client
right if
my clients are if my listener socket is
set then i have used this handle new
connection because if my listener socket
is set then which it means that there is
someone waiting for a new connection
there is some new client waiting for a
new uh connection to make with this
server right but if this is not the case
then obviously there is something
available on one of the existing client
sockets some client has sent some
message right so for that i have written
this function and this function is very
simple let us go so here what i have
done i simply iterated through five
client
array array of five clients so here i
checked
which of the sockets first of all i have
checked which socket which client socket
index is greater than zero because if
clients
whatever client socket index is greater
than zero only that can have some
message from a particular client for
that client right so first thing just
check
which client index is greater than 0 in
the client area and then check if that
client index is greater than 0 then i
need to check if again this fd is set
now i am checking whether the new client
socket
right client socket not new client the
client socket that i have stored whether
that particular socket at a particular
index right is available there to read
some message
if that is available to read some
message in that case
what will happen again this is same fr
what will happen i will simply receive
the message which is coming from the
client
if i have not received the message
smaller than zero something comes this
comes let me just put it here
smaller than 0 this happens i have
already written it sorry this happens
when client closes connection abruptly
if client closes the collect connection
abruptly then in that case
uh then it returns minus one and in that
case you need to close the socket at for
this particular index
and also
make this slot which is this particular
index in the array
in the client array make it as 0 so that
it is available for any new connection
basically if some error comes through
some client then simply there is no need
to retain that particular
socket descriptor for that particular
client right okay now in the else part
if this is not the case then in else
part i'm just printing the message that
has been received from a particular
client okay
so this is the server code
and this is the entire server code using
which we are
listening to the from the clients and we
are listening from the clients for new
connections and we are listening from
the clients for any new message that
they might send
okay so let's go to the client's code
this client code is very simple again
you need to use this wsa startup you are
opening this socket i will save this
code there is nothing special in this
code and after that again here you need
to take care like
in case of server i have used in editor
any but here you cannot use that i have
hard coded this ip address because i
know what is the ip address of my
machine but this is not the right way to
provide the ip address you can use
get host name get host by name those
apis you can use to get your own ip
address correctly and then assign that
ip address using this inet underscore
editor system call uh to this s
underscore editor right so basically
this i net editor y i have used i can
provide this simply strcpy as well but
why have you just i need enter because
again the same thing this i need editor
is converting this ip address into
network byte order which is the big
endian format right so
that is the thing we need to do and
again this port number i know which port
to connect so this is uh four times nine
one so ninety nine thousand nine one and
again this name set is again the same
here you need to call this connect
because you are not server you are
client so you will connect so you are
going to connect through this client
socket
and here you have all the arguments that
i have already discussed in previous
videos so here you need to provide this
sock editor asterisk
to this srv
which is here
here i have declared it so
this is the way you can use it after
connection if the connection is
successful what i will do if the
connection is successful and if the
connection is accepted then it will
return greater than zero and you will
come here so after every two seconds i
am sending
a message
i am asking the client to send the
message i will type the message and then
this message will
go to the client
sorry server and server will print this
message now this is the time for
demonstration of the code okay so let me
just first run my server
okay
if i'm just running my server
right if i'm just running my server then
what will happen it will simply keep
printing that there is nothing
no client and port waiting for any
active connection right but
now if i run some client
right
now i am running some client
now i already told you when the client
gets connected it will ask you it will
come to this while loop it will ask you
what message you want to send so here i
am going to provide the message which is
hi
because which is my name and i'm going
to press enter once i press the enter
this will reach here
and here what will happen it will simply
print those messages
at the server side you can see
receive data from 296 this is then
socket from the client
for a particular client and this is the
message
which was sent by this client highway
cars right so you can see so i already
told you if you want to print the
address and
the client
in that case you can use here you can
store
here when you are accepting the
connection you can
use the struct sock enter srv or
cliented a client address value here
and that will be the same you need to
just
create one more structure like this and
you can just give the name some other
name like socket in client and you can
store when you are accepting the
connection at that time only you can
store the
name
the ip address and the client socket for
that particular client
in some array or in some structure
somewhere in some data structure you can
store that but here just for the
demonstration i have simply used the
client
socket that was available at the server
end after getting connected to the
client
okay so this is the way you can simply
get the connection and print it whatever
is coming so now let me do one more
thing i can do one more thing like let
me check
uh what is the place for this particular
code let me just check where this is
this code where is this file
where i have created this so open
containing folder
and go to the debug and here okay it's
not the right place
okay let me go
to
up okay here is the output so this is
the socket client right so one socket
client i have uh you know a run directly
from here and now one cyclic socket
client i am going to run from here
right so that i can demonstrate you two
clients
okay so
i came here and i just do socket client
right now this socket client here again
i need to accept this connection
and again this new socket need to send a
message hi
new because
right let us see what happens here so
this will come here
and you will see that here on the server
side this is the server side code you
can see that this time it has received
the message from a new client this file
descriptor 220 because two clients i
have used and both the clients have
different
client socket descriptors so this is the
way you can distinguish that
which client is sending to you
right and using this socket descriptor
you if you want to change the code if
you want to do something more what you
can do you can simply
send the message using this client
suppose here i have just
read the message here
in the handle data from client what you
can do before the break you can add one
more code here and in this code you can
send a message you can call the send api
and write there like yes
this is the client connection you know
this socket descriptor from the client
so using this client socket descriptor
you can call the send socket api
right and using that socket api you can
send the message that yes i have
received your message and you can do one
more change here after send you can hear
write receive right what that receive
will do that receive will receive the
message from the server that i just told
you that you can send that yes i have
received your message that
acknowledgement you can
check here so that i leave it up to you
if you face any problem in that just let
me know in the comment section i will
create one more video right but i want
to make this
socket programming really simple for you
guys so that you become a master
at least in this particular basic
concept of socket programming
okay so i hope you enjoyed this video
right and i already written this code
and i will share this code with you guys
in the comment section please see the
comment section there will be two
comments
uh first comment will be for the client
server code and the other comment will
be for the client code so both the codes
i will provide to you
and then you can
use that code and you can run it on your
own on your system and enjoy
right so happy learning please like the
video subscribe my channel there will be
more
on this channel and you can explore my
channel there are number of playlists
related to data structure related to
design patterns you will find uh you
will keep finding new things every day
here because our team and myself we are
going to add as much as technical stuff
the programming language related stuff
and any new thing which is coming in the
market here only
right so uh our videos will be in
english and hindi both right so few
playlists are there in hindi and few
playlists specifically for this socket
programming as well i'm going to prepare
a
playlist in hindi because that is in
demand right so hindi and english
right both the way
our uh you know playlist of our channel
will contain the video list okay so i
hope you enjoyed it and i hope you will
like
uh this video today and i hope you will
check yourself like how your program is
running and i hope you will comment soon
that what kind of issues you are facing
even if if you face any issue okay so
that's it for today guys and i hope you
enjoyed it have a nice day and bye